---
layout: post
title: 2023 highlights and an outlook to 2024
subtitle: Models releases, global projections, workshops and much more
author: Anouk Vlug and Fabien Maussion
date: 2023-12-21T00:00:00
tags: community
---

This year a lot has happened within the community. With the end of the year approaching we thought it would be good 
to summarize the model advancements that have been made, share some of this year's highlights and give an outlook to 2024.

### Code, data and standard projections
- The release of OGGM 1.6 came with substantial improvements in the model. The biggest ones being a [new calibration scheme](https://oggm.org/tutorials/stable/notebooks/advanced/massbalance_calibration.html) 
for the mass balance model, the semi-implicit solver for the glacier dynamics, and the option to [calibrate the model dynamically](https://oggm.org/tutorials/stable/notebooks/10minutes/dynamical_spinup.html). 
All these new features are currently being used in the default set-up and have been used to generate [pre-processed directories](https://docs.oggm.org/en/stable/shop.html#pre-processed-directories) that can be used for initializing OGGM. 	
- [A new option that has been added to the pre-processed directories](https://docs.oggm.org/en/stable/shop.html#additional-available-data) is to have in addition to the
data necessary for an OGGM simulation, other data (e.g. ITS-LIVE) added on the same grid. 	
- With the latest model release, also [OGGM standard projections](https://docs.oggm.org/en/stable/download-projections.html) have been introduced. These are simulations
done with OGGM driven by CMIP5, CMIP6 and ISIMIP3b_CMIP6, up to 2100 CE or 2300 CE. We intend to release new standard projections with each substantial model release from now on. 	
- OGGM is ready for the latest RGI version (RGI 7), with the side note that the global data that is needed for calibration, is not available yet. We’re looking forward to having this in 2024!

### Events
- In collaboration with the Himalayan University Consortium (HUC) and the Centre for Water Informatics & Technology, we organized a [1-week training on glacier modelling](https://oggm.org/2023/10/27/Lahore-video/) last spring at LUMS, Lahore, Pakistan.
- We held the 7<sup>th</sup> [OGGM workshop in Edinburgh](https://oggm.org/2023/09/07/7th-oggm-worshop-summary/). Thank you Beatriz and Dan for hosting!
- In the context of making the OGGM organization ready for the future, there will be an on-line OGGM Governance workshop on January 29<sup>th</sup>.
- The next OGGM workshop will be a joined event, organised together with IGM. The OGGM-IGM workshop will take place August 26-30 in Swiss. More information will follow in 2024!

### Community news
- Rodrigo, Jan and Larissa successfully defended their PhD!
- Fabien moved from Innsbruck to Bristol.	
- [13+ papers](https://oggm.org/publications/) were published that make substantial use of OGGM.
- The community has grown substantially over the last year, sadly we also had to say good-bye to some who shifted their main focus or moved on to something completely different.
Hamid, Julia, Jan and Larissa we will miss you and wish you all the best! Fortunately sometimes people also return, welcome back Beatriz!

### A final word
A big thanks to all who have made a contribution to OGGM, small or big, often or just once, by adding code, documentation, contributing to lively discussions, offering support 
to fellow community members or in any other way! OGGM is an ecosystem that wouldn’t be the same without it and where all counts. Having said that, we are aware that it is hard to 
receive useful credits for these efforts. Our new year's resolution is to find a better way to acknowledge all you do.

We wish you a great holiday and a happy, healthy and fruitful 2024!

